The people who stole the Romans often sank before
they got to Rome. Venus de Milo, for example,
Victoria Soundface, there are many others. Those
are all from Seaport. How long have you been
interested in treasures from the sea? Maybe since
I was going to be an archaeologist. All right.
But... Of course, what are considered treasures
by an archaeologist and marine geologist would
not be treasures in the mind of the common people.
They're mainly interested in gold and silver. And
the old-timers didn't have very much of that. Most
of the coins of the ancient world are bronze,
depending on the group. But there's, for example,
in Vasa, they found... about 4,000 bronze pieces,
bronze coins, and just one silver piece. And the
only piece of gold was a ring at the setting and
fall. So it's not treasure in that sense. It's
treasure in terms of knowledge, however.
There is such treasure off this coast, but it's
hard to read it because the people couldn't write
on this coast. and in other civilizations they
could write. So that there's a vast knowledge
about it. In fact, it's even conceivable that the
Phoenicians and Celts visit North America. Those
maps, the map up there shows potential track
routes and places where sites have been found with
writings It can be translated from Phoenician and
Ogham, which is a Celtic language. Now, there's no
treasure involved in it, gold and silver, but
there's a lot of knowledge. And these voyages
would have taken place from B.C. Not very well
accepted, because people don't like that. People
preceded Columbus. Of course, the first people to
come probably came by way of Bering Strait, It's
certainly in 12,000 B.C., and probably some
before that, long before that, 35,000 or so. But
the earlier ones were not very numerous, and
enough will document
maybe mistakes. To illustrate it still further,
along this coast here, I got interested a few years
ago in the, a lot of flint was present, piles of
flint in the marshes, and flint that's used for
streets and stone fences. Turns out most of this
was ballast brought by ships from England and
France. ships would come empty and ballast and go
back with furs and cotton and tobacco and dump the
ballast before they loaded them. But it turns out
that it probably is 100,000 tons of that flint
ballast on this coast. And several of us were
interested in it together and found a couple
pieces that looked like artifacts. So one was a
very nice flint core from which It looked like
chips had been struck. We sent the cork to a British
museum, and of course when they found that it was
from the New World, it wasn't very popular to have
Old World paleolithic artifacts from the New
World. But when the ballast was picked up from the
beaches, most of it was double hand-sized. Other
people who picked it up wouldn't pay attention
whether they had an artifact or not, so there are
probably a lot of them on this coast. So that's an
illustration of New York archaeology only going
back 300 years, maybe
years. I want to ask some formal questions about
oceanography. That's extraordinarily
interesting, by the way. I'm a great believer in
pre-Columbian contact. As a matter of fact,
People don't generally know it, but when the
Pilgrims came and established their village, you
remember an Indian walked down the street,
Swanto. He said, welcome, Englishman. In
English. He'd been across the ocean four times
already. And the Pilgrims were novices. They went
to Plymouth. They intended to hit Carolinas, but
they missed. And they were afraid to go around the
Cape. And they settled in Plymouth, which had
already been mapped four times and visited at
least six times before by literate people. But
mapping it within four times was well-known. In
fact, it was probably the early visitors that
spread the tuberculosis and other diseases that
eliminated the Indians that made it possible for
the pogroms to stay,
which is curious. But always before the first,
there's some more That's right.
As long as we're sort of wandering around here, I
mean, have you ever read William McNeil's Plagues
and Pestilence? No, I haven't. I don't think I
have. I suggest that to you. Is that the one that's
related to Thera?
No, this is a historical study of the impact of
disease on primitive peoples and what impact
plagues have had upon population spreading.
They're very serious, aren't they? Yeah, and it's
overwhelmingly important to your work in
anthropology. Of course, this was known to the
early settlers. In fact, you probably know that
Hudson Bay Company gave blankets and smallpox to
the Indians. The French paid them for scalps. I'm
not sure they even had scalps before they were paid
for it. There's some debate over that, but most
people think that the Plains Indians at least did
not take scalps until they came into contact with
it. They got paid for it. Got paid for it.
In returning to some sort of formal question I need
to ask about oceanography,
Besides advice to students, what do you think were
the most important technological advances in
oceanography during your career? Well, there's
so many of them, it's hard to tell. I remember going
out on EW scripts on the cruises, and we were much
interested in the flashing light echo sounder. It
didn't record, but we could read the depths and
write it down at two-minute intervals. And so,
really, the first... recording echo sounders
were
a great advance over the business of writing it
down to human animals. The development of seismic
profiling was a very important thing. Ewing had
much to do with that when he was here before he went
to Lamar. And
the early Devices were like Ekman bottles and so
forth, snappers,
and so forth. Made a great advance over nothing,
but those have now been vastly improved. It's hard
to say. It follows a logarithmic curve. So what is
the most important point of a logarithmic curve?
Sometimes the first point is more important, but
it's pretty low. And new points later on are much
more expensive and difficult. Precision timing
is important. in profiling and in lots of other
things. In chemistry, it's clear that the major
advances, major technologies are ones that are
adept. Land chemistry, neutron activation,
spectroscopy, mass spectroscopy, electron
microscopy. Many things like that were just
adapted to the ocean for physical oceanography.
The recording devices to record the temperature
and slendium, oxygen content with depths of
reinforcements. The Nansen bottle was such a
useful thing, which Nansen developed. Nassman
was a statesman, by the way, as well as being an
oceanographer. League of Nations delegate.
But I think he was at the equivalent of League of
Nations at the time. Anyway, it's such a useful
device that it's held up the development of better
ones that may be a detriment rather than a
negative, rather than a plus in a sense. But the
buoys that are developed, the long-term buoys,
are very important ones for them. the geologists
of course use so many different geophysical tools
that they're best used in combination seismic
profile when we do seismic profiling we
occasionally use a seismic refraction with
disposable sonic buoys the do make magnetics at
the same time drag a magnetometer it doesn't cost
anymore as long as they're going same way for
gravity so we measure gravity magnetics,
acoustics all at the same time. So a lot of these
things. Which is more important? I don't know.
Now, finally, of course, you have to test the
inferences from geophysics by drilling. And of
course, the deep-sea drilling is a big jump ahead
of that. We still don't know whether the
continental rises contain no oil or not, because
no holes have been drilled in it. In the DSDP
deep-sea drilling project, They tried to avoid
deep holes because they're afraid they might hit
oil and verizes, and there's no way of cutting off
the bit. So now with the Glomar Explorer, or a ship
equivalent to that, it can be done, but it costs
about $60 million a year to operate compared to
only $15 million a year for the Glomar Challenger.
And now is that more important? It is more
important now, but you had to begin and build on
something else first. Like you say, all
scientists are standing on the shoulders of
predecessors. All equipment is standing on the
tops of the previous equipment. Were there any, I
don't want to use the word discovery because
that's too strong, but were there any theories
advanced in oceanography which came as a shock to
you during your lifetime? Something that was
unexpected? Oh, sure, yeah. For example, I'd
known about turbidity. I'd known about ripple
marks in the shallow water organisms in what
apparently otherwise would have been deep water.
This is in the Pliocene at Los Angeles Basin. And
I'd thought about it quite a bit, but it never
occurred to me that... turbidity currents would
have been the cause. I wish I'd thought about it,
but I didn't. That's a way to evaluate a good idea,
when you wish you'd thought of yourself. Now, of
course, the same thing is true for plate
tectonics. Wegener had the general concept, but
he knew the facts only from the land and not from the
seafloor, and there's more seafloor. And then,
curious enough, the magnetic work that was done
off Northern California was classified as by the
Navy. And when that finally was released and
studied more carefully, that showed the magnetic
stripes, which is a fundamental incentive toward
adding to Wegener's data left on the seafloor. And
once the general concept of seafloor spreading is
made, And you see how nice that fits in with the
known areas of volcanism and the known areas of
deep-sea trenches. Again, I felt that that was a
fine idea. I wish I'd thought about it more. Okay.
Both of those came in during the time I've been
around.
Yeah. As a geologist, the uh there's a great deal of
talk presently about about bringing minerals out
of the ocean to
uh possibly refurbish man's stay here on earth are
you optimistic or pessimistic about that well the
oil oil and gas from the sea floor now has a value of
about um about 50 billion dollars from the sea
floor and uh that's more than twice the value of all
the fish that are caught all the food in the ocean so
there's no doubt what that's that's a very
important thing for the ocean and there's
probably a lot more there the bulk of it probably
must still be there because As I said, we haven't
even drilled the continental rise to know what's
there. And very little drilling has been done
beyond the continental shelf. Most of the
continental shelves of the world haven't really
been thoroughly examined because of mainly
inhospitable climates or inhospitable
politics. And so there's an enormous amount of oil
still left. But we don't know how much there is,
mainly because of continental rise, which has
about half the sediments of the world. So there's
no way to tell. Now we hear a lot about the manganese
nodules, but it's exaggerated and way out of line.
For example, the manganese itself is probably not
worth anything. The cost of extraction, except as
a byproduct, would be too much. But the copper,
nickel, and cobalt are the valuable metals that
are present in them. And are more concentrated in
the sea floor nodules, at least the copper is, than
in very many deposits still remaining on land that
are being worked. Now, if you consider the mining
of the manganese nodules can penetrate the copper
market 10 percent, pretty good penetration. But
these three metals mined on land now amount to
about $10 billion a year. Now, if you could
penetrate the copper market 10% and carry the
nickel and cobalt with it, and there's not too much
of a drop in the price of cobalt when it's produced
in large quantity, then you might suppose it'd be a
billion dollars' worth of metals produced from
the sea floor. Now, it would cost an unknown amount
to recover them, But if the difference between
the, if the profit, the amount left over from the
cost of production is as much as 10%,
and that's available to the United Nations
Seafloor Seabed Committee, which it wants,
that's only $100 million. Now, if you divide that
amongst the undeveloped countries in the world as
they want, Assuming that seabed authority has no
cost for operation, which is certainly not the
case, that's $700,000 a country. And if it's
divided amongst the population of undeveloped
countries in the world, that's three cents per
capita per year. It doesn't buy very much rice. And
the problem is, of course, that the cost has
been... has been put all out of all proportion. I
mean, the potential profits has been imagined all
out of proportion by the people from undeveloped
countries. Not one of the undeveloped countries
or any combination of all 140 of them can mine this
stuff. And it can be mined by half a dozen countries
of the world, the industrial advanced countries.
So the UN wants the countries that can mine it to
mine it, and for them to have the profits. I don't
think it will happen. And if it's mined at all, it
will be. probably by private enterprise that has a
contract with the governments of the advanced
countries. The United States may make unilateral
leasing next year or the year after. Can't wait
forever on the United Nations. So the manganese is
not so very much. A hundred million dollars profit
is a lot for a company, but it's nothing for the
world. Now, the economy overlooked in the
resources from the seafloor is sand and gravel.
And that's about a half a million dollars, half a
billion dollars of sand and gravels recovered
every year in the seafloor. Much of it's from, more
than half it's probably from the North Sea,
England and France, and some, and quite a lot from
New York. It's used mainly for landfill and for
construction purposes, particularly in densely
populated coastal regions where The city is built
on top of previously available sand, gravel, and
river sources. Now, after the sand and gravel,
then you come to the heavy metals like tin and
ilmenite, various titanium metals, and
magnetite, iron metals. Those have a total value
of about $50 million. And after that, you're
dealing with shells and pearls. The total value
for those might be as much as 10 million. After
that, there's very little left. There isn't any
gold and no diamonds produced in the seafloor, in
spite of the land nations. And there probably
never will be.
So is it fair to say you're certain and optimistic
about international control? Yeah. But it seems
like from an outsider that oceanographers are
going to come more and more under pressure and
stress from international law and international
agencies. Well, a period of benign neglect is
helpful in that case. For example, Brazil, 10
years or so ago, made a law saying, thou shalt not
investigate our shelf. So sure enough, nobody
went there. And I had a phone call one day from
Brazil saying, unfortunately, they didn't have
any marine geologists, but we trained some for
them. Well, I took one, and we gave him some
training and let him learn a little bit about
methods and so forth. And out of that came a
proposal, then, that we make a joint study of the
Brazilian shell, and nothing much—didn't hear
anything from that for about three years. And
another phone call said, we're ready now. Can you
bring a ship down next month and start work? And so I
told them, no, because I'm involved in the work off
of Africa. And I couldn't go to the NSF to get more
money to work on another area before that was
finished. So they wanted to know how much it would
cost. I said, about a million dollars. And they
said, oh, we'll furnish that. And so they
furnished them their own ship and funds and so
forth, probably about a million. And we made a
general study of the sediments of the shelf and the
general structure of the shelf, the shell of the
structure, anyway. And
I think exactly the same thing is going to happen
with other countries. When we worked off of
Africa, for example, I got permission from all but
one of the 27 countries. Not one was Guinea. And
Guinea is in a place where it's at the boundary
between low oil potential to the east and high oil
potential to the north, right at the junction, the
shoulder of Africa. And I told that to a
representative from Guinea. In fact, he was the
ambassador, Pliny Potentiary, from Guinea. And
he said, well, maybe you'd better come back. And I
said, well, you can't do that. Guinea's too small.
We just simply went around Guinea, and Furryfoot
may be there from the side, so the loser is Guinea.
They know nothing about what's there. Now, of
course, they can make a contract with our company
to go there and get some information, but there's
no one in Guinea, no geologists in Guinea who can
understand it. Have you foreseen a sort of,
development of international cooperation where
people like... Unilaterally. Unilaterally.
That's right. For example, a couple years ago I was
interested in a project to look at the Caribbean as
a unit. There are a lot of governments there,
different languages and so forth, but most of them
have such a narrow view that they like to have work
done off their coast, but not off other people's
coasts. They want the results to be classified and
so forth, so it doesn't get done. But Columbia and
Venezuela were among the most interested. In
fact, it's the most potential for new offshore
oil. But as we were going on with the proposal for
that, they nationalized the American Oil Company
Holdings, so we just turned it all over. But I think
that's the way it's going to be. The countries that
know the least about it are the ones that are going
to continue to learn the least. Then to stress the
250-mile limit and whatever? Yeah. I think marine
geologists are probably in a better position than
other oceanographers because their results can
have considerable economic value on the
countries. And so there are many countries
that... that are that are understood but many of
them don't have any money for example um dave ross
next door here made a study of the persian gulf in
which the iranians paid the iranian side of the
persian gulf in which the iranians paid for most of
the work much of the work maybe not and the saudis
would like to do the same thing on their side There
are other problems about the Saudis, of course,
because we have a lot of problems, public problems
with anti-Semitism
from the Saudis, and so it's not an easy place to
work. In fact, that's a general problem because
you can't find... very many countries that don't
have an animosity against somebody. When we
worked in Africa, we had to be careful to let the
South Africans off in a place where they wouldn't
get scalped, so to speak. And in fact, that
illustrates it quite a bit, because I wrote
hundreds of letters to African countries and
people and institutions asking them to
participate in the shipboard work. And we had
people, five people from Ghana and one from
Senegal for me. in spite of asking those. There was
always some reason why they couldn't come, but the
name came, I think, because we didn't have people
to understand much of it. In contrast, South
Africa asked, and we took eleven people from
there, because the spaces weren't occupied
anyway by black Africans. And we had people from
Brazil, Argentina,
Guatemala, Jamaica, many countries of Europe. So
the people who needed it most didn't copy. And if
they'd been aboard, they could copy anything they
wanted to. And they wouldn't know what to copy,
mostly, but that's their problem. So I think this
sort of thing will continue, and we'll find that we
can work many places in marine geology. That's
good. You're more optimistic than I'd expected
you to be as a marine geologist since continental
shelves are closing off. Well, interestingly
enough, one of the ones that looks the least likely
to be funded is an American continental shelf.
That's mainly because Congress has said that
they'll have a federal program of exploration
when we And that, of course, will be run by the
United States Geological Survey. And the point is
that they, in their innocence, think that the
exploration can find the oil pools, and then they
lease it to the companies which can pump them. They
forget that most of the discoveries are made
during the development of an oil field. But
they'll have to wait.
That's another kind of political oceanography.
Excuse me, I caught your allergies. I don't think
allergies is a problem. They think allergies are a
problem. I hope they're not. I feel bad if that were
the case. Thank
you. What about government restrictions in
oceanography? Do you feel as if you're coming
under more government pressure, less freedom of
activity to work? Sure. As a result... Those
geographic labs have to have more and more people
to satisfy the government regulations,
bookkeeper labs and so forth. And of course, the
Office of Naval Research funding is being
considerably reduced now. And there was an
amendment, I forgot what it's called.
Mansefield. Mansefield, yeah, that's right. I
knew the state, but I had forgotten the name. I
mentioned it to somebody the other day. So this
means that you have to have an applied basis for the
work, and most times the application doesn't come
until far later. In fact, I mentioned about the oil
provinces here. Same for East Asia, same for
West Africa. There's a lot of oil potential in
places where it hasn't been drilled yet. But the
main of the argument is that having to do with...
who gets the revenue, not whether there's any oil
there. But anyway,
NSF is carrying much of the load now. I don't know
whether it can continue, because the Congress is
kind of concerned that the data should be applied
immediately. And that's a poor way of operating,
because if you run out of basic knowledge, then you
can't begin to apply it there. And in a way, it's
getting to where decisions about funding are kind
of being based more on consensus than on
principles. Einstein couldn't be funded.
You see research then becoming more practical.
More applied. More applied is a better word. And
then the sort of basic R&D, having less... perhaps
having less funding. But to illustrate what
happens with the so-called applied research,
BLM, Bureau of Land Management, requires
so-called baseline surveys in the areas where oil
is going to be developed in order to know whether,
if there's a pollution, how much it changed the
bottom, and mainly response to
neo-environmentalist demands now the problem
there is that there aren't enough biologists to
make common studies of this samples can't be taken
very close together it's the the value of it is zero
in my opinion or a very tiny fraction of one percent
above zero but the money going to that is
tremendous but it's the there's little basic
knowledge and the application is probably zero